Alright, welcome back to yet another theory lecture
about how CSS works behind the scenes.
Remember that we were talking about parsing CSS, right?
First, we talked about the cascade
and so now it's time to talk about how values
are processed in a CSS parsing phase.
We're also going to look at the most commonly used CSS units
by percentages, ems, rems, vh, and more
in order to learn how they are actually calculated.
But first off, you may ask,
"Why this is even important to learn?"
It is important for a lot of reasons.
First, because each time you use a unit other than pixels,
like rem or vh or some other relative unit,
you need to know that it will ultimately be converted
to pixels and you also want to know how that happens.
Also knowing this stuff, will help you predict and control
better which property takes which value in the end.
So ultimately, if you want to become
a serious CSS developer, it's just good to know
how all of these pieces fit together to render
a final website in the end.
So this is what we're going to do in this slide.
We will analyze how these five CSS declarations built
a small element in the bottom of the slides here.
And in particular, how exactly the declared values
are processed in six different steps
starting from the declared value
all the way to the final actual value.
So we're going to analyze the width, padding, and font-size
in order to see what's going on here.
So let's start with the paragraph's width,
which you see has two declared values.
100 pixels from the p selector and 66%
from the amazing class selector.
So these are our declared values.
They're actually conflicting.
So what is used to determine which one will apply?
That's right, it's the cascade.
And in this case, it is quite simple,
because the amazing class selector is more specific
than the p element selector, right?
This means that the width of 66 will be applied
and it is therefore, our cascaded value.
Now, of course you don't need to know every single technical
name I'm going to show you here,
but if you ignore the jargon and the more technical words,
then you will see how this is actually all quite simple.
Alright, so next up in the sequence,
there's something called the specified value
in the official CSS specification.
This one is the default value of a certain CSS property.
In this case, it's not really relevant
because we have a cascaded value already,
but we'll come back to this later.
Next, there's a computed value.
In this step, values with relative units
are converted to pixels so that they can be inherited,
but more on inheritance later.
Also, CSS key words like "orange, oral, boulder"
and a lot more are computed and replaced here in this step.
Here in this case, we have a percentage value
which is technically not a unit,
and so nothing happens in this step.
Next up, is the so called "used value".
In this calculation step, the CSS engine uses
the rendered layout to figure out some
of the remaining values, for example percentage values
that depend on the layout, and that's actually the case here
because the 66 percent that we specified is in relation
to its parent element and so the parser
needs to know that width in order
to calculate the paragraphs width, right?
So the sections width is defined as 280 pixels
and so 66 percent of that is 184.8 pixels.
And this is now our "used value".
Now technically the step five in the next one only happened
in the rendering phase of the page,
but that's not really relevant
in order to understand this logic.
Now, bravas usually cannot really display 184.8 pixels.
That's just way too specific and so usually, a value
with a comma like this is simply rounded.
In this case, to just 185 pixels, and that is after
all these calculation steps, the so called "actual value"
which is now ready to be used in the layout.
And so the actual value as we see here is usually obtained
by considering the browser and revised restrictions.
Cool, so now we know how this works behind the scenes of CSS
Awesome, that's great progress.
So let's now take a look at the padding property
for the paragraph.
Now, you're probably thinking,
"There is no padding property there." Right?
And it's actually true that we didn't declare it
but it still has to have a value, okay?
That's because in each element of the page,
each and every CSS property needs to have a value even
if you don't even declare it at all.
So, for padding, we have no declared value
and also no cascaded value, but we do have a specified value
and that's because each CSS property
has something called an "initial value"
which is simply the value used
if there is no cascaded value.
So basically, if we don't declare a value
and if neither the browser nor the user define a value,
then the initial value will be used.
Actually, inheritance also plays a role here,
but let's leave that for later, okay?
Now, different properties have different initial values
of course, and for padding, it's zero pixels,
which makes a ton of sense actually.
Because if we declare a padding,
that should probably mean that we don't want any, right?
And so it's zero, and that's it.
There's no more calculations to do
because it's already an absolute unit
and so the computed, used, and actual values
are all just zero pixels.
Alright, now about the root font-size.
This means the overall font-size of a document.
We didn't define it anywhere, right?
So again, there is no declared value.
However, this is different from the padding property
that we looked at before.
That's because for the font-size,
the browser usually has a default value of 16 pixels.
Remember how we said earlier that CSS
could come from different sources?
Well, in this case, the font-size is a user agent
declaration and therefore, the result of the cascade
is these 60 pixels that the browser
has declared for the font-size.
And so, this is our cascaded value.
Again, there is no more calculations needed
and therefore, 60 pixels is also the used value.
Next, let's analyze the section's font-size
and now we actually do have a declared value of 1.5 RAM.
Remember that RAM is a relative unit
and so it needs to be converted to pixels by the engine.
So the cascaded and specified values are still 1.5 RAM
but the computed value is 24 pixels.
And why is that you may ask?
It seems a bit random, right?
It's because the RAM unit is always relative
to the root font-size, which is 16 pixels in this example
as we saw before and therefore 1.5 RAM is 1.5 times 16
which is 24, but I'm going to explain this in more detail
in our next slide, don't worry.
Alright, and so 24 pixels is our final actual value as well.
And now the last one, the font-size of the paragraph.
Once more, looking at the code, we can't find a font-size
so how come the text still has a font-size?
Well, in this case, it's no default and it's also
no initial value, but it's a mechanism called inheritance.
Now, I'm going to talk in great detail about inheritance
a bit later, but what you need to know is that some
properties like the ones related to text, such as font-size,
inherit the computed value of their parent elements.
It works like this because it's actually extremely useful.
Imagine you had to specify the font-size
on each and every element.
It wouldn't be really practical, right?
So we just need to define it on some parent
and the children will then inherit it
unless we declare it something else of course.
So again, we talk about inheritance a bit later
but this is the most important lesson about it.
Alright, and so these 24 pixels, we inherited
from the sectioned diff of our specified value
and of course, it's all the same down to the actual value.
Phew, wow, this was a lot to take in.
It's great that you're still with me at this point.
Good to see you're really willing to learn this stuff.
In this slide, I want to show you in great detail
how the CSS engine converts relative units to pixels
in order to calculate computed and used values
because this is crucial to know when you write your own code
so this has actually a very practical application
in the real world and its relative units are fundamental
to build modern responsive layouts as you'll see
when we continue with the project.
So again, I have a small code example here for you
so I can show you how different units work
in different situations.
So we have some global CSS code for the html, then a header,
and then an element inside header called "header child".
That's the basic structure.
Alright, so we start with percentages.
And there's a distinction between using percentages
for fonts or for length or distance measurements.
Now again, the percentage is technically
not a unit, but to make things easier,
we'll simply treat it as one, okay?
So in a header, we have a declaration that says
"font-size, 150%" and what that means is
that the element will have a font-size
150% larger than its parent element.
In this case, the parent element is simply the HTML
or the body with a font-size of 16
and so the header will have 150 percent of that
which gives us 24 pixels and that's how it works.
Quite simple, right?
Now for length expressed in percentages,
it works a bit different.
When we express a length measurement in percentages,
like height, a padding, a margin, or something else,
the reference is always the parent element's width
like in our example where the padding of 10 percent
results in a used value of 100 pixels
because our parent element has 1000 pixels of width
and 10 percent of 1000 is of course 100.
So never forget that the parent's width is the reference
for percentage based calculations.
Believe me, that I learned this the hard way
through a lot of confusion and experimentation.
Next up, we have some font-based relative units, em and rem.
And again, it's different to use ems for fonts or for length
so both ems and rems are font-based,
but the difference between them is that ems
use the parent or the current element as a reference
while rems use the root font-size as the reference.
So let's see how it works.
If we want to use ems for font-sizes,
then the reference is simply the parent's computed font-size
similar to what happens with percentages.
In our example, a three em font-size on the header child
element results in 72 pixels simply because that's three
times the parent font size, which is 24.
So three times 24 makes 72, make sense?
Now for length, it's just a bit different.
The two em padding on the header,
since it's a length measurement,
uses the font size of the current element as a reference
and we already know that's 24 pixels.
And so two em will result in a 48 pixel padding, got it?
It's a subtle difference, but an important one.
So for fonts, the reference is the parent.
For length, the reference is the current element.
And now finally, about the rem.
It actually works the same way
for both font sizes and length
because it always just uses the
root font size as a reference.
This means that the 10 rem padding that we have here
will result in a 160 pixels because the root font size is 16
and 10 times 16 is of course 160 pixels.
So, that's the big difference between ems and rems.
Now, you may ask, "Why should we actually size stuff
with ems and rems if they are based on font-size?
It seems a bit strange, right?"
And the answer is that by doing so,
we can build more request responsive layouts
because just by changing font sizes,
we will automatically change length
since it depend on a font size and that gives us a lot
of flexibility, and it's just a great technique.
And so we're actually going to do that in practice
in a project so that you can see
how powerful this approach is.
Now finally, we have two more relative units
but they're really simple.
These two are based on a browser's view port
and they're called vh and vw.
Basically one vh is just one percent of the view port
height and one vw is just one percent of the view port width
so when we specify a height of 90 vh,
this will simply translate to 90 percent
of the current view port height.
Of course, in this specific example,
we don't know what the view port height is
but the browser who's painting the page knows about it
and so it does these calculations
when it's calculating the used values in pixels
and the same applies, of course, to vw.
So a width of 80 vw, for example,
is just 80 percent of the view port's width.
You probably already used the vh unit before, right?
That one was really useful to built nice hero sections
with 100 percent of the view port's height
so that's where we use them a lot.
Alright, let's now quickly summarize
what we learned in this lecture.
Maybe you can even print this out
if that makes learning easier for you.
So each CSS property has an initial value
which is used if nothing else is declared
and if there is no inheritance, but we're going
to talk more about inheritance in the next lecture.
Browsers specify default font size
for each page and that's usually 60 pixels,
and this is a user agent definition, so it's not
an initial value coming from the CSS specification.
Percentages and relative values are always converted
to pixels in order for the CSS engine to be able
to render the page on the screen.
About percentages, they are measured relative
to their parent's font-size if used to specify font-sizes
and they are measured relative to their parent's width
if they're used to specify length.
Now ems are measured relative to their parent's font size
if used to specify font-sizes and they're measured relative
to the current font-size if they're used to specify length.
Next, rems are always measured relative
to the document's root font-size that I mentioned before.
And finally, vh and vw are simply percentage measurements
of the view port's height and width respectively.
Okay, and so this wraps up this lecture which was rather
intense, I know, but still super important, in my opinion.
If anything is not 100 percent clear,
I would actually advise you to watch the lecture again
or at least parts of it, so that everything
makes sense for you.
Then after that, let's just move on to the next lecture
where we're going to talk about inheritance
that we only touched very briefly in this lecture.